#summary corpus of the remixable text from Machine of Death
#labels Featured

_[http://machineofdeath.net/ Machine of Death]_ is fantastic.

= Most of the stories in _Machine of Death_ allow derivative works =

And when I hear "derivative works", I think the word "remix". But what's a remix of a text? Cut-up poetry? n-gram models to generate ominous-sounding emails to your family? Counting how many times the word "of" appears? The original text, but with randomized capitalization? This is for you to decide.

Assuming you make use of this body of text, that is. This is all of the derivs-allowed stories from the _Machine of Death_ collection, in convenient ascii form! This will allow, as [Lindsey Lindsey] points out, "Machine Learning of Death".

Just note that since the stories contained in this corpus are Creative Commons (Attribution, Noncommercial, Sharealike), so is the corpus itself, and your derivative works.

= [http://code.google.com/p/narorumo/downloads/detail?name=mod_remixable.tgz Download the corpus here.] =

See the included [http://narorumo.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mod_remixable/README-CORPUS readme file] for author credits.

= Also: the script to make the corpus... =
You may want to edit the Python script to include different sections from the book (the Introduction or Preface or Contributor information), or a subset of the stories. Just grab `makeremixable.sh` and `justremixable.py` and put them in the same directory as [http://machineofdeath.net/mod.rtf the Machine of Death RTF ebook].

 * http://narorumo.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mod_remixable/README
 * http://narorumo.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mod_remixable/makeremixable.sh
 * http://narorumo.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/mod_remixable/justremixable.py